---
title: "A case against divestment"
subtitle: "I originally posted this on Facebook. The following has been slightly edited."
date: 2018-02-04T09:45:03-08:00
draft: false
---

I've recently seen a few posts on Facebook about a petition which asks Exeter to divest from fossil fuel investments. Many of the arguments I've read in support of divestment argue that it's the ethical and right thing to do. However, I think the situation has more nuance. Here's my case against divestment.

Global warming is a problem best prevented by reducing fossil fuel consumption. Thus, a reasonable goal for any divestment campaign is to reduce consumption of fossil fuels. But investments in fossil fuel companies don't raise fossil fuel consumption, just like how buying Apple stock doesn't increase demand for iPhones. At most divestment slightly reduces the stock price of fossil fuel companies -- and when I say slightly, I mean very slightly, given that fossil fuel companies had a market cap of $4.65 trillion USD according to Bloomberg back in 2014. Using a rough estimate based on S&P 500 growth, that number today is roughly $6.4 trillion USD, which is almost 5000 times larger than Exeter's $0.0014 trillion USD endowment (also adjusted for S&P 500 growth from a $1.2 billion USD valuation at the end of June 2017). Given that it's highly unlikely that more than, say, 20% of Exeter's total endowment is invested in fossil fuels, I think it's safe to assume that Exeter's investment would at most account for less than 0.004% of total fossil fuel investments. And even if Exeter were to divest, those companies wouldn't suddenly lose a bunch of money -- some other investors would notice the price drop and buy those stocks that Exeter sold. Exeter's impact on fossil fuel companies, should it choose to divest, is essentially negligible.

On the other hand, there is a significant advantage to not divesting -- Exeter can invest in funds which have a higher rate of return. Exeter's endowment is so large that even small increases in rates of return can have a huge impact. Suppose that Exeter's annual rate of return averaged over its entire endowment is 0.1% lower after divestment. That's $1.3 million lost every single year -- which is enough to offer free tuition to 28 Exonians. Keep in mind that 0.1% is a very conservative estimate. I suspect that if the cost of divestment was only around $1 million/year then Exeter would have divested already -- the real cost is almost certainly significantly higher. Not to mention that the board of trustees is not unintelligent -- its members have also almost certainly done the math and concluded that the good Exeter can do with the extra money outweighs the bad caused by not divesting.

I also want to challenge a notion associated with many divestment campaigns and 350.org in particular: that _using fossil fuels is inherently unethical_. In the last fifty years, China has emitted billions of tons of carbon dioxide as a result of burning fossil fuels. But in the process, those fossil fuels helped 700 million Chinese lift themselves out of poverty. The Chinese were only able to industrialize quickly because fossil fuels provide a tremendous amount of energy very cheaply. Did the Chinese act unethically?

In fact, 350.org's campaign reeks of post-industrial privilege. A video on its website says that they "believe in a sustainable and prosperous future, which is socially just and economically fair". Right now in the world there are around 2 to 3 billion people who are living in poverty. Around 800 million of those people are living in abject poverty. How is it "socially just and economically fair" for 350.org to "revoke the social license of the fossil fuel industry" and "fight iconic battles against fossil fuel infrastructure" -- thereby forcing impoverished people to not use a cheap source of energy with which they could very likely lift themselves out of poverty -- because rich white people in a country thousands of miles away have decided that fossil fuels are bad, shouldn't be used, and shouldn't be invested in? How are impoverished people supposed to buy solar panels and Tesla batteries to store power at night if they live on less than \$10 a day? Hell, I'm working in a booming tech industry and _I_ can't even afford solar panels. Caring about climate change is a luxury good (in the economics sense) -- you can only worry about climate change once you stop worrying about food, shelter, education, clothing, et cetera.

Divestment, fighting climate change, and stopping the use of fossil fuels seem nice and feel warm and fuzzy. But there are real world consequences. The first, most obvious consequence is that Exeter loses a significant amount of money. (Yes, I've read the website[^2], including the part where it says "we hope to create a financial plan to divest from fossil fuels and reinvest in renewable energy sources so that the net impact on the school will either remain at zero or produce a profit." I promise you that the trustees are smarter than all of the students/recent graduates of the academy, and if there was a way to do this then they would be doing it by now. It's literally their job.) The less obvious consequences are that we could potentially contribute to the degradation of infrastructure and investments which have _literally lifted hundreds of millions of people out of poverty and probably will lift hundreds of more millions of people out of poverty very soon_.

By the way, I completely support renewable energy sources. It's just that I think that the social good Exeter provides with the money it receives from its investments probably outweighs the slight harm that investing in fossil fuels causes. I also think that since we live in a post-industrial nation, we forget that most people in the world can't afford renewables and the challenges that come with them (no solar energy at night without expensive and dangerous batteries; no wind energy if it's not windy). Fossil fuels are a much more viable way of providing energy cheaply and reliably to the masses, especially those in developing countries. I also think a much more "socially just" way of preventing or slowing down climate change is to stop wasting as much fossil-fuel-generated energy in America and other developed nations[^1]. I'm also a fan of a carbon tax (but who isn't?).

[^1]: [The New York Times: Why is America Wasting So Much Energy?](https://www.nytimes.com/2017/11/07/opinion/bipartisan-energy-efficiency.html)
[^2]: [Divest Exeter](https://divestexeter.weebly.com/)
